docs/zkapps/advanced-snarkyjs/actions-and-reducer.mdx, before:

---
title: Actions & Reducer
hide_title: true
---

:::info

Please note that zkApp programmability is not yet available on Mina Mainnet, but zkApps can now be deployed to Berkeley Testnet.

:::

# Actions & Reducer

Like events, **actions** are _public_ arbitrary information passed along with a zkApp transaction. However, actions give you an additional power: you can process previous actions in a smart contract! Under the hood, this is possible because we store a commitment to the history of dispatched actions on every account -- the **actionsHash**. It allows us to prove that the actions you process are, in fact, the actions that were dispatched to the same smart contract.

Using actions and a "lagging state" pattern, you can write zkApps that can _process concurrent state updates by multiple users_ -- see the next section. Besides that, we imagine all kinds of use cases where actions act as a built-in, "append-only" off-chain storage layer.

To use actions, we first have to declare their type on the smart contract. The object we declare is called a **reducer** -- because it can take a list of actions and reduce them:

```ts
import { SmartContract, Reducer, Field } from 'snarkyjs';

class MyContract extends SmartContract {
  reducer = Reducer({ actionType: Field });
}
```

Contrary to events, for actions you only have one type per smart contract; they also don't have a name. The `actionType` in this example is `Field`.

On a `reducer`, you have two functions: `reducer.dispatch` and `reducer.reduce`. "Dispatch" is simple -- like emitting events, it will push one additional action to your account's action history:

```ts
this.reducer.dispatch(Field(1000));
```

"Reduce" is more involved, but it gives you full power to process actions however it suits your application. It might be easiest to grasp from an example. Say we have a list of actions and want to find out if one of them is equal to `1000`. In JavaScript, there's a built-in function on `Array` which does this:

```ts
let has1000 = array.some((x) => x === 1000);
```

However, as you might know, you can also implement this with `Array.reduce`:

```ts
let has1000 = array.reduce((acc, x) => acc || x === 1000, false);
```

In fact, `Array.reduce` is powerful enough to let you do pretty much all array processing you can think of. With `Reducer.reduce`, we give you an in-snark operation which is just as powerful:

```ts
// type for the "accumulated output" of reduce -- the `stateType`
let stateType = Bool;

// example actions data
let actions = [[Field(1000)], [Field(2)], [Field(100)]];

// state and actionsHash before applying actions
let initial = {
  state: Bool(false),
  actionsHash: Reducer.initialActionsHash,
};

let { state, actionsHash } = this.reducer.reduce(
  actions,
  stateType,
  (state: Bool, action: Field) => state.or(action.equals(1000)),
  initial
);
```

What we called `acc` above is now called `state`; we also have to pass in the state's type as a parameter. In addition, we have to pass in an `actionsHash` which refers to one particular point in the actions history. Like `Array.reduce`, `Reducer.reduce` takes a callback which has the signature `(state: S, action: A) => S`, where `S` is the `stateType` and `A` is the `actionType`. It returns the result of applying all the actions, in order, to the initial `state`. In this example, the returned `state` will be `Bool(true)`, because one of the actions in the list is `Field(1000)`. Reduce also returns the new actionsHash -- so you can store it for using it when you reduce the next batch of actions. One last difference to JS reduce is that this takes a _list of lists_ of actions instead of a flat list. Each of the sublists are the actions that were dispatched in one account update (e.g., while running one smart contract method).

An astute reader may have noticed that this is eerily similar to a standard "Elm architecture" -- this is because we have an instance of a scan over an implicit infinite stream of actions (though here that are aggregated in chunks) -- this is very similar to the problem that came up when processing transactions within the [Mina Protocol L1 with Snark Workers](https://minaprotocol.com/blog/fast-accumulation-on-streams). This may sound scary, but it should be familiar to web developers through its instantiation via the Redux library or more recently via the `useReducer` hook in React!

There is one interesting nuance here when compared to traditional Elm Architecture/Redux/useReducer instantiations: Because we're handling multiple actions concurrently in an undefined order, it is important that actions [commute](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commutative_property) against any possible state to prevent race conditions in your zkApp. Given any two actions a1 and a2 applying to some state s, `s * a1 * a2` means the same as `s * a2 * a1`.

### Reducer - API reference

```ts
reducer = Reducer({ actionType: AsFieldElements<A> });

this.reducer.dispatch(action: A): void;

this.reducer.reduce<S>(
  actions: A[][],
  stateType: AsFieldElements<S>,
  reduce: (state: S, action: A) => S,
  initial: { state: S, actionsHash: Field }
): { state: S, actionsHash: Field };

Reducer.initialActionsHash: Field;
```

In the near future, we want to add a function to retrieve actions from an archive node:

```ts
this.reducer.getActions({ fromActionsHash?: Field, endActionsHash?: Field }): A[][];
```

Right now, `getActions` is available for [testing with `LocalBlockchain`](/zkapps/how-to-test-a-zkapp).

### Fetching Actions from an Archive Node

Since Mina nodes do not store historical network information and actions are not kept on-chain, emitted actions are only preserved in the Archive Node. Consequently, a zkApp must fetch its previously emitted actions on the Mina network from an Archive Node.

As the Archive Node is essentially a database, it does not offer a user-friendly API that SnarkyJS can readily utilize to fetch actions. To address this issue, a GraphQL server was developed to retrieve network information such as actions and actions from the Archive Node. SnarkyJS will use this GraphQL server to fetch actions from the Archive Node.

To configure SnarkyJS to use an Archive Node to fetch actions, use the `archive` property in the `Mina.Network` function. The `archive` property must be specified in the `Mina.Network` function to fetch actions from an Archive Node; otherwise, an error will occur.

You can set the `archive` property to one of the following endpoints:

```sh
https://api.minascan.io/archive/berkeley/v1/graphql
```

```sh
https://archive.berkeley.minaexplorer.com
```

For example, to use the `archive` property, see the following example code:

```ts
const Network = Mina.Network({
  mina: '', // Use https://proxy.berkeley.minaexplorer.com/graphql or https://api.minascan.io/node/berkeley/v1/graphql
  archive: '', // Use https://api.minascan.io/archive/berkeley/v1/graphql/ or https://archive.berkeley.minaexplorer.com/
});
Mina.setActiveInstance(Network);
```

By setting the `archive` property to one of the listed endpoints, SnarkyJS uses the selected endpoint to fetch events. For instance, if a zkApp has already emitted events and broadcasted the transaction, you can use the `getActions` function to retrieve actions for a zkApp:

```ts
class MyContract extends SmartContract {
  ...
  @method getActionsExample() {
    // Get all actions for this zkApp
    let pendingActions = this.reducer.getActions({
      fromActionHash: actionsHash,
    });
    this.reducer.reduce(
      pendingActions,
      Field,
      (state: Field, action: Field) => {
        ...
      },
      { state: counter, actionsHash }
    );
  }
}
```

`getActions` takes an optional `fromActionHash` parameter that is the `actionsHash` of the last action that was processed. If `fromActionHash` is not provided, `getActions` fetches all actions for the zkApp. `getActions` returns a list of actions that were emitted after the `fromActionHash` was processed.

### Actions for concurrent state updates

One of the most important use cases for actions is to enable concurrent state updates. This enablement is also why actions were originally added to the protocol.

A detailed explanation of the problem, and how actions can provide the solution, can be found here: https://github.com/o1-labs/snarkyjs/issues/265#issuecomment-1177512908

We also have a [full code example](https://github.com/o1-labs/snarkyjs/blob/main/src/examples/zkapps/reducer/reducer.ts) which demonstrates this pattern. Leveraging `Reducer.reduce`, it takes only about 30 lines of code to build a zkApp which handles concurrent state updates.

### Events vs Actions

[Events](events) and Actions are two distinct mechanisms for logging information alongside a transaction. Events are not meant for use within proofs directly as they can't be predicated on inside proofs. Events are used to signal to UIs, but can also be used for reconstructing merkle trees. Actions, on the other hand, can be accessed within provable code via Reducers as we see above. Both Events and Actions are not stored in the ledger and only exist on the transaction.

Commit message:

Include voting example for actions

docs/zkapps/advanced-snarkyjs/actions-and-reducer.mdx, after:

---
title: Actions & Reducer
hide_title: true
---

:::info

Please note that zkApp programmability is not yet available on Mina Mainnet, but zkApps can now be deployed to Berkeley Testnet.

:::

# Actions & Reducer

Like events, **actions** are _public_ arbitrary information passed along with a zkApp transaction. However, actions give you an additional power: you can process previous actions in a smart contract! Under the hood, this is possible because we store a commitment to the history of dispatched actions on every account -- the **actionsHash**. It allows us to prove that the actions you process are, in fact, the actions that were dispatched to the same smart contract.

Using actions and a "lagging state" pattern, you can write zkApps that can _process concurrent state updates by multiple users_ -- see the next section. Besides that, we imagine all kinds of use cases where actions act as a built-in, "append-only" off-chain storage layer.

To use actions, we first have to declare their type on the smart contract. The object we declare is called a **reducer** -- because it can take a list of actions and reduce them:

```ts
import { SmartContract, Reducer, Field } from 'snarkyjs';

class MyContract extends SmartContract {
  reducer = Reducer({ actionType: Field });
}
```

Contrary to events, for actions you only have one type per smart contract; they also don't have a name. The `actionType` in this example is `Field`.

On a `reducer`, you have two functions: `reducer.dispatch` and `reducer.reduce`. "Dispatch" is simple -- like emitting events, it will push one additional action to your account's action history:

```ts
this.reducer.dispatch(Field(1000));
```

"Reduce" is more involved, but it gives you full power to process actions however it suits your application. It might be easiest to grasp from an example. Say we have a list of actions and want to find out if one of them is equal to `1000`. In JavaScript, there's a built-in function on `Array` which does this:

```ts
let has1000 = array.some((x) => x === 1000);
```

However, as you might know, you can also implement this with `Array.reduce`:

```ts
let has1000 = array.reduce((acc, x) => acc || x === 1000, false);
```

In fact, `Array.reduce` is powerful enough to let you do pretty much all array processing you can think of. With `Reducer.reduce`, we give you an in-snark operation which is just as powerful:

```ts
// type for the "accumulated output" of reduce -- the `stateType`
let stateType = Bool;

// example actions data
let actions = [[Field(1000)], [Field(2)], [Field(100)]];

// state and actionsHash before applying actions
let initial = {
  state: Bool(false),
  actionsHash: Reducer.initialActionsHash,
};

let { state, actionsHash } = this.reducer.reduce(
  actions,
  stateType,
  (state: Bool, action: Field) => state.or(action.equals(1000)),
  initial
);
```

What we called `acc` above is now called `state`; we also have to pass in the state's type as a parameter. In addition, we have to pass in an `actionsHash` which refers to one particular point in the actions history. Like `Array.reduce`, `Reducer.reduce` takes a callback which has the signature `(state: S, action: A) => S`, where `S` is the `stateType` and `A` is the `actionType`. It returns the result of applying all the actions, in order, to the initial `state`. In this example, the returned `state` will be `Bool(true)`, because one of the actions in the list is `Field(1000)`. Reduce also returns the new actionsHash -- so you can store it for using it when you reduce the next batch of actions. One last difference to JS reduce is that this takes a _list of lists_ of actions instead of a flat list. Each of the sublists are the actions that were dispatched in one account update (e.g., while running one smart contract method).

An astute reader may have noticed that this is eerily similar to a standard "Elm architecture" -- this is because we have an instance of a scan over an implicit infinite stream of actions (though here that are aggregated in chunks) -- this is very similar to the problem that came up when processing transactions within the [Mina Protocol L1 with Snark Workers](https://minaprotocol.com/blog/fast-accumulation-on-streams). This may sound scary, but it should be familiar to web developers through its instantiation via the Redux library or more recently via the `useReducer` hook in React!

There is one interesting nuance here when compared to traditional Elm Architecture/Redux/useReducer instantiations: Because we're handling multiple actions concurrently in an undefined order, it is important that actions [commute](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commutative_property) against any possible state to prevent race conditions in your zkApp. Given any two actions a1 and a2 applying to some state s, `s * a1 * a2` means the same as `s * a2 * a1`.

### Reducer - API reference

```ts
reducer = Reducer({ actionType: AsFieldElements<A> });

this.reducer.dispatch(action: A): void;

this.reducer.reduce<S>(
  actions: A[][],
  stateType: AsFieldElements<S>,
  reduce: (state: S, action: A) => S,
  initial: { state: S, actionsHash: Field }
): { state: S, actionsHash: Field };

Reducer.initialActionsHash: Field;
```

In the near future, we want to add a function to retrieve actions from an archive node:

```ts
this.reducer.getActions({ fromActionsHash?: Field, endActionsHash?: Field }): A[][];
```

Right now, `getActions` is available for [testing with `LocalBlockchain`](/zkapps/how-to-test-a-zkapp).

### Fetching Actions from an Archive Node

Since Mina nodes do not store historical network information and actions are not kept on-chain, emitted actions are only preserved in the Archive Node. Consequently, a zkApp must fetch its previously emitted actions on the Mina network from an Archive Node.

As the Archive Node is essentially a database, it does not offer a user-friendly API that SnarkyJS can readily utilize to fetch actions. To address this issue, a GraphQL server was developed to retrieve network information such as actions and actions from the Archive Node. SnarkyJS will use this GraphQL server to fetch actions from the Archive Node.

To configure SnarkyJS to use an Archive Node to fetch actions, use the `archive` property in the `Mina.Network` function. The `archive` property must be specified in the `Mina.Network` function to fetch actions from an Archive Node; otherwise, an error will occur.

You can set the `archive` property to one of the following endpoints:

```sh
https://api.minascan.io/archive/berkeley/v1/graphql
```

```sh
https://archive.berkeley.minaexplorer.com
```

For example, to use the `archive` property, see the following example code:

```ts
const Network = Mina.Network({
  mina: '', // Use https://proxy.berkeley.minaexplorer.com/graphql or https://api.minascan.io/node/berkeley/v1/graphql
  archive: '', // Use https://api.minascan.io/archive/berkeley/v1/graphql/ or https://archive.berkeley.minaexplorer.com/
});
Mina.setActiveInstance(Network);
```

By setting the `archive` property to one of the listed endpoints, SnarkyJS uses the selected endpoint to fetch events. For instance, if a zkApp has already emitted events and broadcasted the transaction, you can use the `getActions` function to retrieve actions for a zkApp:

```ts
class MyContract extends SmartContract {
  ...
  @method getActionsExample() {
    // Get all actions for this zkApp
    let pendingActions = this.reducer.getActions({
      fromActionHash: actionsHash,
    });
    this.reducer.reduce(
      pendingActions,
      Field,
      (state: Field, action: Field) => {
        ...
      },
      { state: counter, actionsHash }
    );
  }
}
```

`getActions` takes an optional `fromActionHash` parameter that is the `actionsHash` of the last action that was processed. If `fromActionHash` is not provided, `getActions` fetches all actions for the zkApp. `getActions` returns a list of actions that were emitted after the `fromActionHash` was processed.

To see a end-to-end example of zkApp fetching actions from a running network and including them into your zkApp, [see this example](https://github.com/o1-labs/snarkyjs/blob/main/src/examples/zkapps/voting/voting.ts).

### Actions for concurrent state updates

One of the most important use cases for actions is to enable concurrent state updates. This enablement is also why actions were originally added to the protocol.

A detailed explanation of the problem, and how actions can provide the solution, can be found here: https://github.com/o1-labs/snarkyjs/issues/265#issuecomment-1177512908

We also have a [full code example](https://github.com/o1-labs/snarkyjs/blob/main/src/examples/zkapps/reducer/reducer.ts) which demonstrates this pattern. Leveraging `Reducer.reduce`, it takes only about 30 lines of code to build a zkApp which handles concurrent state updates.

### Events vs Actions

[Events](events) and Actions are two distinct mechanisms for logging information alongside a transaction. Events are not meant for use within proofs directly as they can't be predicated on inside proofs. Events are used to signal to UIs, but can also be used for reconstructing merkle trees. Actions, on the other hand, can be accessed within provable code via Reducers as we see above. Both Events and Actions are not stored in the ledger and only exist on the transaction.
